Add prometheus integration doc (#7112)
istio/istio.io: content/en/docs/ops/integrations/prometheus/index.md

---
title: Prometheus
description: Information on how to integrate with Prometheus.
weight: 20
keywords: [integration,prometheus]
---

[Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) is an open source monitoring system and time series database. You can use Prometheus with Istio to record metrics that track the health of Istio and of applications within the service mesh. These metrics can be visualized using tools like [Grafana](/docs/ops/intgrations/grafana/) and [Kiali](/docs/tasks/observability/kiali/).

## Configuration

> In an Istio mesh, each component will expose an endpoint that emits metrics. Prometheus works by scraping these endpoints and collecting the results. This is is configured through the [Prometheus configuration file](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/) that controls which endpoints to query, the port and path to query, TLS settings, and more.

Reviewer: This is is -> This is

Reviewer: This is configured via the [Prometheus configuration file](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/) which controls settings for endpoints to query, ports/path to use, etc.

To gather metrics for the entire mesh, Prometheus should be configured to scrape

1. The control plane (`istiod` deployment)
1. Ingress and Egress gateways
1. The Envoy sidecar

> 1. The user application, if they expose Prometheus metrics

Reviewer: The user application (if they expose Prometheus metrics)

To simplify the configuration of metrics, Istio offers two modes of operation.

### Option 1: Customized scraping configurations

> The built-in deployment of Prometheus is bundled with all of the needed scraping configuration. To deploy the built-in Prometheus instance, follow the steps in [Customizable Install with Istioctl](/docs/setup/install/istioctl/) to install Istio and pass `--set values.prometheus.enabled=true` during installation.

Reviewer: The built-in demo installation of Prometheus contains all the required scraping configuration. To deploy this instance of Prometheus,

> This built-in deployment of Prometheus is intended for new users quickly getting started. However, it does not offer advanced customization, like persistence or authentication. To utilize an existing Prometheus deployment, copy the scraping configurations in [`prometheus/configmap.yaml`]({{< github_file>}}/manifests/charts/istio-telemetry/prometheus/templates/configmap.yaml).

Reviewer: This built-in deployment of Prometheus is intended for new users to help them quickly getting started.

However, it does not offer advanced customization, like persistence or authentication and as such not considered production ready.

> This built-in deployment of Prometheus is intended for new users quickly getting started. However, it does not offer advanced customization, like persistence or authentication. To utilize an existing Prometheus deployment, copy the scraping configurations in [`prometheus/configmap.yaml`]({{< github_file>}}/manifests/charts/istio-telemetry/prometheus/templates/configmap.yaml).

Reviewer: To utilize an existing Prometheus deployment -> To use an existing Prometheus instance augment its configuration by adding the scrape configurations from

Author: Just a tip that helps a lot with docs reviews, press the "insert suggestion" button and  you can provide these inline. Thanks for the review!

Reviewer: Yes, I always forget to use the option :(

> This configuration will set up scraping jobs for the control plane, as well as for all Envoy sidecars. Additionally, a job is configured to scrape application metrics for all pods with relevant `prometheus.io` annotations:

Reviewer: This configuration will set up scraping jobs -> This configuration will add scrape job configurations

* `prometheus.io/scrape` determines if a pod should be scraped. Set to `true` to enable scraping.
* `prometheus.io/path` determines the path to scrape metrics at. Defaults to `/metrics`.
* `prometheus.io/port` determines the port to scrape metrics at. Defaults to `80`.

#### TLS settings

The control plane, gateway, and Envoy sidecar metrics will all be scraped over plaintext. However, the application metrics will follow whatever Istio configuration has been configured for the workload. In particular, if [Strict mTLS](/docs/tasks/security/authentication/authn-policy/#globally-enabling-istio-mutual-tls-in-strict-mode) is enabled, then Prometheus will need to be configured to scrape using Istio certificates.

> When using the bundled Prometheus deployment, this is configured by default. For external integrations, please follow [Provision a certificate and key for an application without sidecars](/blog/2020/proxy-cert/) to provision a certificate for Prometheus, then add the TLS scraping configuration.

Reviewer: For external integrations -> For custom Prometheus deployments

### Option 2: Metrics merging

{{< warning >}}
This option is newly introduced in Istio 1.6 and is considered `alpha` at this time.
{{< /warning >}}

To simplify configuration, Istio has the ability to control scraping entirely by `prometheus.io` annotations. This allows Istio scraping to work out of the box with standard configurations such as the ones provided by the [Helm `stable/prometheus`](https://github.com/helm/charts/tree/master/stable/prometheus) charts.

{{< tip >}}
While `prometheus.io` annotations are not a core part of Prometheus, they have become the de facto standard to configure scraping.
{{< /tip >}}

> To enable this setting, pass `--set meshConfig.enablePrometheusMerge=true` during [installation](/docs/setup/install/istioctl/). When this setting is enabled, appropriate `prometheus.io` annotations will be added to all workloads to set up scraping. If these annotations already exists, they will be overwritten. In these case, the Envoy sidecar will merge Istio's metrics with the application metrics.

Reviewer: annotations will be added to all workloads to set up sidecar proxy scraping.

If these annotations already exists (for application metrics) , they will be overwritten but the sidecar proxy will merge its metrics with the application metrics.

Does this mean that when users do a "kubectl apply" of the same YAML, they will see a diff?

Author: Its just like the 100s of other things we add during injection. They are applying the deployment (generally) and we modify the pod, so its not really any issue

> When using this option, all metrics will be exposed over plain text.

Reviewer: all the metrics

> When using this option, all metrics will be exposed over plain text.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This option exposes all the metrics in plain text.
```

> This feature may not be suitable if:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This feature might not suit your needs in the following situations:
```

> * You need to scrape metrics using TLS

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* You need to scrape metrics using TLS.
```

> * Your application exposes metrics with the same names as Istio metrics. For example, your application metrics expose an `istio_requests_total` metric. This may happen if the application is itself running Envoy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Your application exposes metrics with the same names as Istio metrics. For example, your application metrics expose an `istio_requests_total` metric. This might happen if the application is itself running Envoy.
```

* Your Prometheus deployment is not configured to scrape based on standard `prometheus.io` annotations.

> If required, this can be disabled per workload by adding a `prometheus.istio.io/merge-metrics: "false"` annotation on a pod.

Reviewer 2: Is "this" referring to what's described in the last bullet?

Author: No, the entire feature. I added "This feature"

## Best practices

> For larger meshes, advanced configuration may help Prometheus scale. See [Using Prometheus for production-scale monitoring](/docs/ops/best-practices/observability/#using-prometheus-for-production-scale-monitoring) for more info.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For larger meshes, advanced configuration might help Prometheus scale. See [Using Prometheus for production-scale monitoring](/docs/ops/best-practices/observability/#using-prometheus-for-production-scale-monitoring) for more information.
```
